The most primitive path analytics
question one can ask is to find the best
path from node one to node two.
What does best mean?
Well, that depends on the actual
needs of the application.
But in general, to specify the best path,
we need to define when one
path is better than another.
This is usually expressed in
terms of an optimization problem.
Where we need to minimize and maximize
our subfunction subject to constraints.
What kind of constraints?
Two common criteria for graphs are,
inclusion and exclusion conditions.
Inclusion criteria may specify which
nodes we have to include in the path.
And exclusion criteria
specifies which nodes and
edges should be excluded from the path.
In addition,
one specify a preference criteria
that act as a softer or
less strict constraint.
For example, we would like to
minimize highways on my trip.
Or avoid condition.
These are soft because although
the users would like to have them
enforced completely, it is all right
if they are not fully enforced.
A good practical use case occurs when I'm
trying to drive to work in the morning.
Ideally, I would like to take a path
having the shortest distance from my home.
For example, node I, to my workplace,
which is node B in the graph.
But I have to drop off my son at school.
So my path must include his school,
the J here.
However, I would like to avoid roads
around the new construction that's
happening about five miles from my
workplace, like the node E in the graph.
Because there is usually a huge traffic
delay around that construction site.
I could also add
a preference criteria like
I don't prefer to drive on the highway.
But for this discussion,
we'll skip the preference idea.
Too complicated?
Okay, let's start with a simpler problem.
To start with, let's drop the constraints
and look at the problem with just
the optimization part of the problem,
having a single variable.
In our case, that variable is the sum
of edge weights from the source,
that is the starting node I,
to the target, which is B.
This problem is handled by all mapping and
road direction software.
Here is a Google map screenshot,
in which I am trying to go from my home
in North San Diego,
to a collision center in a nearby city.
Google Maps shows three different routes,
and
highlights one as a preferred solution.
You should readily see that the real
shortest path of 26.6 miles
will take the longest time at the time of
the day when I was looking at the map.
So this means the weights here are not
raw distances but estimated travel time.
You should also notice the blue, red, and
orange segments in the preferred
path are presented by Google.
The orange and red street segments
clearly represent congestion areas and
therefore have higher weight
than the blue segments.
Therefore, the weights of the street
segments are not really static but
change with many other factors,
like weather or the time of the day.
This is why the least weight path problem
is an important problem to solve for
the benefit of the commuter.
A widely applied algorithm
that is applied for
shortest path problems is
called Dijkstra's algorithm.
Originally, Dijkstra considered a variant
of the problem where the task is
to find the shortest path from a single
source node to all other nodes.
We'll go through the algorithm here.
However, there are many good online
resources including tutorials and
YouTube videos describing the algorithm.
For our discussion, we'll confine
ourselves to the case where both
the source and
the target nodes are known in advance.